IoT Challenge #2
Packet Sniffing

Home Challenge #2
Part -1• Download the two PCAP files here or from WeBeep
• Analyse the traffic with Wireshark or writing simple
scripts (Python, C++)
• Answer the 8 questions (CQ1-CQ8)
(IGNORE MALFORMED PACKETS)
Part -2• Solve the exercise in pdf (two questions EQ1, EQ2)
FILL THE MS FORM for both parts: form

2

PART 1
Questions on the PCAP file
CQ1-4 refer to file A.pcapng
CQ 5-7 refer to file B.pcapng
CQ8 refers to both files

Challenge Questions (1-2)

4

!! For CQ1-4, refer to the file A.pcapng
CQ1a) Find all NON Confirmable DELETE requests directed to the coap.me
server that received a successful response.
Take note of the MID of such requests

CQ1b) How many of the requests found in point CQ1a) actually obtained the
desired outcome?
CQ2) How many CoAP resources in the local server received the same
number of unique unsuccessful Confirmable POST and PUT requests?
Assuming a resource receives X different CON unsuccessful POST requests and Y different

CON unsuccessful PUT requests, how many resources have X=Y, with X>0?
!! Consider unsuccessful only if there is a response stating it is not successful !!

Challenge Questions (3-4)

5

!! For CQ1-4, refer to the file A.pcapng
CQ3a) How many separate observe notifications have been sent containing
values for the resource “/dining_room/temperature”, ignoring
retransmissions?
CQ3b) How many of the notifications found in point CQ3a) are useless (e.g.,
a waste of traffic)?
CQ4) How many MQTT-SN messages are received by the clients from the
local broker listening on port 1885?
!! Pay attention on the Wireshark port to analyze MQTT-SN packets
(Edit -> Preferences-> Protocols->MQTT-SN)
---------------------------------------------------------------------

!! From NOW ON (CQ5-7), refer to the file B.pcapng

Challenge Questions (5-7)

6

!! For CQ5-7, refer to the file B.pcapng
CQ5) How many MQTT subscribers receive a last will message derived from
a subscription that includes atleast one wildcard?
CQ6a) How many different MQTT clients sent atleast one message to erase
a previously retained value in a topic in the public HiveMQ broker?
CQ6b) How many of the clients found in CQ6a) connected to the HiveMQ
broker with a client identifier strictly longer than 7 bytes (>7)?

CQ7) How many MQTT subscribe requests directed to the local broker
specify a topic with atleast two wildcards?

Challenge Questions (8)

7

CQ8) Compare the local broker usage in the two capture files A.pcapng and
B.pcapng. The goal is to have a plot on the number of layers of the topics
used in the publish messages directed to the local broker in the two captures.
Produce a histogram plot with number of messages for each number of layers
• Take note of the total number of publish
messages considered for this analysis in the
two captures (all number of layers) -> Report
the two values as CQ8a) CQ8b) in the form

Produce a figure with this behaviour →
• Include commented scripts in the
delivery (if any)
• Include the obtained figure in the report

PART 2
Exercise

Part 2 - Exercise
A smart building system includes:
• A battery-powered temperature sensor that transmits a measurement
every 2 minutes
• A battery-powered actuator (fan controller) that receives temperature
data and decides whether to turn ON/OFF
• A gateway (mains-powered) that only supports MQTT
The sensor and actuator can communicate either:
• Directly using CoAP
• Through the gateway using MQTT
Communication parameters
Payload size: 12 bytes
Topic/resource length: 8 bytes

9

10

Part 2 - Exercise
Consider the following message sizes (in bytes), which already
include header and payload size:
COAP
CON PUT Request
PUT ACK

70 B
15 B

MQTT
Subscribe
Sub Ack
Publish
Pub Ack
Connect/Disconnect
Connect Ack

65 B
55 B
75 B
50 B
60 B
50 B

Part 2 - Exercise
Assume that:
1. Transmit and Receive cost per bit are
ETX = 50nJ/bit, ERX = 58nJ/bit (nanojoule per bit)
2. CoAP communication uses Confirmable (CON) messages
3. MQTT communication uses QoS 1 (for both actuator and sensor sides)
4. Ideal communication (no losses)
5. When retransmission is required, RTO = 30s and MAX_TRANSMISSIONS = 3
6. Devices start disconnected
7. MQTT connections are closed gracefully during sleep periods (with
non-acknowledged DISCONNECT)
8. Only the energy consumed by the sensor and actuator must be
considered (ignore gateway consumptions)

11

Part 2 - Exercise

12

Exercise Question 1 (EQ1):
Compute the total communication energy consumed by the battery-powered sensor
and actuator over 1 hour in:
(a) CoAP (direct communication)
(b) MQTT (via the gateway)
Provide numerical results in µJ (microjoule).
Exercise Question 2 (EQ2):
Assume now that the actuator wakes up only once every 30 minutes.
Which protocol would you choose for long-term operation?
Justify your answer (max 300 characters), explicitly stating any protocol parameter
required (e.g., clean session, retain, observe, block-transfer modes etc…) and
performance metric you optimize.
For EQ1a and EQ1b, motivate your answers in the PDF, and report the results in the form.
For EQ2, report your full response in both the report and the form.

Challenge deliverable

13

Deliver a ZIP file containing:
• A PDF named Challenge.pdf containing motivated responses with all
filters used and comments of any additional code (if used). Specify your
names + person codes in the pdf!
• A PDF named Exercise.pdf containing the solution of the Part 2
exercise. Specify your names + person codes in the pdf!
• FILL this form with the requested values (both parts)

Organize clean reports! Very bad reports will be penalized
Upload the zip file on the folder #2 on WeBeep “Consegne” folder
The ZIP should be named as follows:
2-teams:
<leader_personcode>_<other_personcode>.zip
Single:
<person_code>.zip

PLEASE NOTE (Part 1)

14

1. Files without name and personcode or in a weird format won’t be
corrected (=0 points)
2. Always make clear and highlight your answer.
The answer should be clear and unique!
Example, answers like this:
“If ……… then the answer is 4, but if instead …………. then answer is 5”
Will get 0 points. If you have doubts on questions ask before submitting
3. Try to produce small but effective answers, write only useful things and if
required upload images taken e.g. from wireshark. Final answers should
be written as text. (not like, “see image for the answer”)

For 2 people teams:

15

• Choose your team leader and name the file as:
<leader_personcode>_<other_personcode>.zip
• Only the teamleader should upload the challenge in WeBeep

Do note upload the same challenge more times!!!
• Can I take the challenges with the other class students (different Prof.)?
YES, but only the team leader should upload the challenge in WeBeep

16

Delivery Deadline
• FIRM Deadline:
April 23, 2026 h 23.59

• Max 2 people

Good Luck!

