(Trascritto da TurboScribe. Aggiorna a Illimitato per rimuovere questo messaggio.)

Okay, so the second challenge is again on whatever we have seen on the application layer until now. So we have seen two labs and one exercise lecture. So the challenge will be on the last three lectures that we have done together.

And it will be on packet sniffing. So the core will be analyzing network traffic in MQTT co-op. There will be one question on MQTT-SN.

So this is the core of the challenge. You will be provided with two pickup files. So they will come under .pickupng extension.

It is a file to be read in Wireshark or whatever tool that you want to use for traffic analysis. But basically, if you double click and you have Wireshark installed on any of these files, Wireshark will open with the packets inside these files, which is the same as capturing live that we have seen during the labs, but it's a pre-recorded capture with the packets that we wanted to include. You will have eight challenge questions and two exercise questions.

So there will be two parts and you will see also different of the two parts in the Microsoft Forms that you will find. Each of these will also need to be filled on the form. So please read the challenge PDF that we are delivering carefully.

Read the questions on the forms. Actually, the question on the form is just a repetition of the challenge PDF. So the important things are in the challenge PDFs.

So starting from the first part, the first part is on the files that we are sending. And basically, we have eight questions. The first four are referring to the first file, A.pickupng. So please pay attention on this.

I will ask this probably three or four times during the slides so that you are aware that the first four are to pickup A. The second five, six and seven questions are for pickup B. And then the last question of the challenge part will consider both the files. First, two questions. Of course, we can read it together, but I suggest it would take a while, but I suggest you to read them carefully and if something is not clear on each of these questions, which doesn't mean I don't know what is the response I ask, but it's I don't understand if this is what is requested or not.

So in this case, as you can see, it's pretty clear that the first question is divided in two, question A and question B. So in that form, you will also have two parts, one for challenge question one A, one it's pretty clear also in the form. If something is not clear or misunderstandable, please ask me before submitting. It's better to have a clear overview of the request before sending the response, because otherwise I don't know if you want to cover almost all the responses and leave to me the choice.

The choice on the response is on you and provide a clear response. There are a lot of cases in which you may assume something which is actually wrong from the protocol perspective. It's not me to decide how the protocol is done.

So it's not like if protocol request one sends a message, then the answer is this, otherwise it's that. No, because the protocol has a specific logic. So you have challenge question one A and B and so on.

So up to challenge question number four, you use the pick-up A.pick-up NG. Then from now on, challenge five, six, and seven, so from the next slide, you shift to the next pick-up. Pay attention that one question is on MQTT-SN on port 1885.

If you see or not packets on this port with the filters for MQTT-SN depends if you set the correct port for that protocol in Wireshark. So if you're using Wireshark, you can go to Edit Preferences Protocols and customize the port for that specific protocol. We have seen in MQTT last time for MQTT-SN is the same strategy, Edit, and it's also in the slide.

It's also in the lab slides. Edit Preferences, the protocols, and then you change the port, in this case, 1885. Then, of course, if you don't find packets because there are no packets, it's correct.

If you don't find packets because you don't set the correct port for MQTT-SN, then it's an error from your side because we are trying to cover everything. If something is unclear, write in the forum, ask me an email. Better than answering without knowing.

Challenge question five, six, and seven, again, on file b.pickup.ng, you find the files linked to the PDF or in the webip.consegne folder, so you will have it clear. Also in this case, question six is divided in a and b, and of course, the question b is just completing question a, so it's referring to what you find in question a. If, please read it carefully, if something is not clear on the questions, ask in the forum or send me an email, better before giving the answer. Finally, question a.8 for this challenge is asking to compare the behavior in one and other file, so you will consider both the files, and it is asking to not replicate but produce a similar figure that you find here.

Why not replicate? Because in this case, you are seeing random data, you will compute the real numbers. What I am asking is an Instagram plot with the number of messages for each topic size, so you have one layer in the topic, two layers in the topic, three layers, and so on. For each of these number of layers, you find the total number of published messages directed to the local broker, so it's written.

Again, do not consider only what I'm telling, but read carefully, because maybe something is omitted here. What it's asking is to replicate basically the figure and pay attention that you will not obtain the same figure, because the values in the figure that I provide is fake, but you will have real values in your pickups. Of course, you will have two pickups, so give one label for pickup a, one label for pickup b. In this case, it's blue and orange.

And we also ask you to take the total number of messages that you are considering, so summing any number of layers in the topic, and give this number in the forms for the capture a and capture b. So this is up to now the challenge part. Then there is also an exercise part in which we provide a system setup. You have a smart building system with three different nodes.

Two of these are battery operated. You have a temperature sensor and a battery powered actuator, for example a fan. The sensor is transmitting measurement every two minutes, so you have this as a strict requirement.

The actuator will receive these values and decide whether to turn on and off the fan. Then you optionally have a gateway, which is attached to the mains power. So basically, it's not battery operated, and you don't care about the energy spent by the gateway.

And it only supports MQTT. You may decide whether to go with a direct transmission sensor actuator with co-op, or with a pub-sub communication pattern using the gateway. Here you have some parameters.

For example, the payload size and topic length. You have the message size, and we are providing you the messages that you should use. Put a request for co-op, and put hack.

Subscribe, sub-hack, connect, con-hack. You decide what's needed in the communication. But here you have already a hint on how to schedule communication, because you have the size of the messages.

Then you have some assumption for obtaining the questions that we are giving. So you have the cost for transmitting and receiving a message actually is specified in nanojoule per bit. So of course, pay attention.

Bit, take the size and multiply by 8 to get from bytes to bits and so on. So pay attention on the measurement. Then co-op and MQTT both are using an acknowledgement communication.

So co-op is using confirmable. MQTT is using QS1. If you decide, I mean you will for sure decide MQTT because one question is asking to use one or the other and compute the result.

So whenever you are using MQTT, pay attention. Both sides, pub and sub, will use QS1. So you will have hacks.

Then ideal communication. So there are no losses. So if a message is sent, there is no possibility of losing it.

Devices are starting disconnected. That is, you will take note of the fact what you need to first start a publish or a subscribe or co-op or MQTT needs connection and decide. Consequently, when a retransmission is required, I don't know if there will be the possibility, but it's for completeness, use what we have seen today.

RTO set to 30 seconds, max retransmission three, including the first one. So max three transmission. Then also in this case, some assumptions for MQTT, since of course, you know that MQTT needs to be connected, if a device needs to sleep, the connection is closed in a good way.

So you send a disconnect and you go away. In this case, a non-acknowledged disconnect, it means that who is receiving this connect will not send a hack back. Then, of course, the final point, as we already discussed, only the energy from a sensor and actuator is needed.

You should ignore whatever happens to the gateway energy because it's attached to the mains. So you don't care about its energy consumption. Then you have two questions.

The core of the exercise is two questions. The first one is divided into two. That is, compute the total communication energy by considering both the sensors, so the sensor and actuators.

So the total communication energy, including the two nodes, over one hour. You know what happens if the sensor needs to transmit at a certain rate, the actuator is there and so on. If you are using a co-op, case A, or if you are passing to the broker in MQTT, the gateway, case B. So in the form, you will also be asked to report these values in microjoule.

Case A for a co-op, case B for MQTT. Then exercise question number two, assume now that the actuators, the actuator wakes up every 30 minutes. Which protocol would you choose for long-term operation under these assumptions? So the actuator wakes up after every 30 minutes.

And of course, you will have in the form one question asking, what is the protocol choice? Another is justify. So please don't just randomly choose one and that's it. Give an explanation on why you are choosing that protocol depending on the parameter that you choose.

For example, in co-op, you may have observed, I don't know, it's up to you. In MQTT, you may have last will, twin session, whatever you have seen. So choose also the parameters to optimize the result and to choose the long-term operation if the actuator is waking up every 30 minutes.

And each of these explain in the report. So provide a PDF report for part one and part two and also fill properly the form. Typically for the first part, I will ask you numerical values.

For the second part, which is on this exercise, you may provide a full response on the report. For part one, for exercise question one, provide numerical values. For exercise question two, you can also write the full response in the form to have it there.

Of course, if you need to sketch figures or exercise numerical values and so on, you can put everything in the report. Challenge derivable. So once we know that the challenge is divided into two parts, part one, Wireshark with the two pickups, eight questions, and so on.

Part two, the exercise with two questions. Provide one PDF with all the challenge question responses. So eight responses.

And then one PDF for the exercise part, in which you can provide the computations that you do for the exercise, a sketch of the figure, whatever you want. Provide a concise but clear report. And clear means I don't need to decide for you what is the response.

I like it in the report, for example, for part A, what is the real answer that you think. It's not like you try to cover all the cases, and then I need to decide. I want one final value.

It's not me deciding what is the response. If there is some freedom on the response, then ask before submitting, especially for part one. Of course, remember to include the name and the person code, because often it happens that I have one file, and then I need to catch to the other file or remember the name and the match from with the person code.

This provides this, as it will make us very faster for the evaluation. Otherwise, each delivery, I need to find with the name, so then the name has a different course, because some of you may be under Professor Cesana. So it becomes longer and longer, make it easier providing name and person code.

Final thing, of course, it's all written here. But again, if you have some doubts, you can ask in the forum. I will create a forum thread for this challenge.

So please check before asking a question if the question was already done in the same or in the other course forum, as there are two WeBip channels, one for Professor Redonia, one for Professor Cesana. And basically, that's it. You can also mix and match.

You can change the partner from challenge one. For example, you didn't like how the partner worked for the first challenge, you can change it. Sad for him.

And you can take the challenge alone. You can take the challenge with another partner, and so on. Can I take the challenge with another partner from Professor Cesana? Yes, you can do it.

But pay attention to deliver the challenge only once, because then we split the deliverables, and we need probably to evaluate double the times. And it's not good for us. The deadline is April 23, which is basically you have, including tomorrow, 10 full days.

April 23 included, so at 2359. Read the challenge, and in the next days, if you have any questions, I will try to cover all your questions in the forum, and good luck.

(Trascritto da TurboScribe. Aggiorna a Illimitato per rimuovere questo messaggio.)