(Trascritto da TurboScribe. Aggiorna a Illimitato per rimuovere questo messaggio.)

So today we are going to see the third lab in the IoT course and we are starting playing with the application layer protocols for the IoT. In the first two labs you have seen a walkway, you played with the ESP32, yesterday we just released the first challenge so good luck for the challenge and today we are shifting a topic and focusing on the application layer and typical protocol that you find in the IoT and how to play with them. So first of all an introduction about myself since it's the first time we meet. 

My name is Fabio Palmese and I'm a postdoc at AntLab so it's the same lab as Professor Redondi and Antonio and my research focus is on IoT and network traffic analysis so if you ever feel like have some kind of questions or want to discuss about this you find me via email or here. So today we are starting a new topic that you have you have seen in the theory lectures which is how to communicate in the IoT at the application layer. We will start with a comparison with the standard protocols for the web which for example HTTP and then we will shift to a constrained environment which is typical for IoT devices which is low with low battery low resources and we will introduce co-op which is an application layer common for the IoT. 

Finally we will see a software for packet inspection which is Wireshark. I guess many of you in other courses have played with Wireshark already. Did you ever see Wireshark play with it or by hand maybe? Okay I see some hands.

Okay so starting with the main comparison with the standard protocol first of all why do we need to have different protocols for the IoT? Well this is typical because we have different constraints in a normal standard device which is a smartphone or computer or a server and the constraint the world of the IoT. Typically you have low resources since you have low resources you want to spend less energy and for this reason you want to transmit only the essential information. For this reason given that we have different needs there is for sure the requirement to have a new protocol optimized for low latency and low impact transmission. 

So if for example in the standard communication we have HTTP for example for scrolling the web we have a web socket for real-time communication and so on for the IoT we will need the specific protocols to optimize the communication from the actual payload information being the essential information to be transmitted with the less overhead as possible so lower overhead in the communication but also from the energy perspective and this is why at the lower layer we find for example new physical layer protocols new MAC layer protocols and so on and in the upper layers we have adaptation to the well-known protocols for the low resources of the IoT. So starting back from where we are starting which is HTTP have you ever played with HTTP in any previous courses like you know already what we are using it every day for for example scrolling our social media as well as browsing in google and so on. So the standard architecture in HTTP is a client-server architecture which means you typically are the client you have a web server around the world and you ask a specific resource for example a web page sending a request to the server the server will receive the request process find the resource and return back the resource as a response.

You have four different request methods for example GET, POST, PUT and DELETE and these are the references for HTTP so for example you want to have a resource you typically send a GET request you want to send your data you typically use a POST or a PUT you want to delete a resource typically in web browsing you don't typically use a DELETE because it's typically forbidden to delete resources in a not proprietary server but still there is also this method to be used in HTTP. So once you know the methodology on where to find the resources how to contact the resources the question is how to identify the resources so I know that sending a GET request I will read the value still we need a methodology a standard way to identify resources online and this is the reason we have URI so Uniform Resource Identifiers. What is a URI? The most common is actually a subset of URI which is the URL which helps us identify the location of the resource.

The most general idea is a URI which contains all the information about the resource. In this case you have HTTP colon slash slash it means the protocol so the first part of the URI is the protocol HTTP then you have the domain name or the IP address for example www.google.com. Optionally you can also specify the port the transport layer port in which the server is listening so you find the server location with example.com but still under the same server you may have different open services and you can specify one of them specifying the transport layer port which is for HTTP it is a TCP port for example 1234. Then after the port you know exactly what is the service and you can specify the resource inside the service for example slash forum slash question or slash a specific page. 

After the resource optionally typically not used for our everyday life but optionally you can specify a query which specifies some parameters inside the URL. For example with the question mark and specifying the set of parameters with the name of the parameter equals value of the parameter. For example in this case we find question mark parameter one equals to value one and we can continue with attaining parameters and values with the end. 

So end and then you go parameter two and value two equal value two. This is actually useful if you want to play with HTTP and you are planning to have your own application in which you set parameters to be sent from the client to the server in the URL. So if you are doing a get request you typically specify the parameters in the URL and this is the way you can do it. 

So now we know what are the main request methods in HTTP. For example we know that with the get request we can retrieve the value of a resource and we know how to identify the resource. Then how to play with HTTP, how can we send actually a HTTP request. 

The first methodology is using our web browser. So if I open Google Chrome and I write something in the URL the standard way is that the browser sends an HTTP get request. So even if we don't know still when you click enter after writing something what you are doing is sending a get request to that specific URL. 

If it's not a URL you typically go for a Google search in the browser but still it's a get request to the Google services. So for example here I have the virtual machine ready. In the virtual machine we have a brave web browser. 

If you open the browser and write something in the URL bar you will send a get request which is the most common standard way to send a get request. For example HTTP slash www.google.com. By sending this we are sending a get request. The most common way even if 90% of the people doing this is unaware of what's happening still we are sending a get request. 

The standard get request with no parameters and with the resource, the base resource in the Google web server which is HTTP.com slash and that's it. However what if we want to play with other request methods for example a post, a put or a delete? Well the standard methodology in the web browser doesn't allow this and so we have additional tools to do it. For example browser extensions. 

Here we have different tools that we suggest. For example there is Postman which is a fancy GUI client that allows you to personalize the HTTP request and today we are playing with a command line tool that you find in the virtual machine and it was in the list of the suggested browser. It's the most common HTTP tool from command line when you are playing with programming which is the CURL. 

So if you have the virtual machine set up it will be there otherwise it's very easy to have a CURL in your own laptop. How to send a get request with the CURL? You simply specify the name of the command which is CURL and then the resource URI. So how to identify the resource? The most standard request is for example CURL and the name of the resource HTTP slash slash name of the server port of the server optionally and then the path of the resource. 

So if we open the virtual machine we can do it together. Can you read if I write? Okay so if I don't specify anything else but only the request URI I am sending a get request. So the standard method is the get. 

So in this case CURL HTTP www.google.com and we just sent the same information that we were sending with the browser in this case using a command line tool. What am I seeing here? This is the HTML of the web page. So if I scroll up here I have all the information that then gets rendered as an HTML page. 

So this is basically the HTML that gets interpreted by our web browser and display us the fancy Google web page in this case. So here for example we find the title and so on. You can obtain the same in the web browser if you go into the developer settings after after going to the Google web page if you press F12 you should see the developer setting and you will find the same information which is the HTML of the page you just requested. 

So this was one of the most common web servers that we typically use for doing our web research. For today we also prepared a custom HTTP server which simulates a smart home environment. You find this web server into the IoT examples folder. 

So what we can do is to open the example folder, open the HTTP server folder inside and run a command line here in this folder to play and run with this Python server. We don't need to know about Python we only need to know the command to run a Python script. So if we go into the folder we right click and click open terminal here. 

Be sure that you are in the correct folder so it's stating desktop IoT examples HTTP server. If you have downloaded these scripts in your machine pay attention that you are in the correct folder and then we can type Python 3 server.py. By doing so we are starting our own HTTP server. So our machine is now an HTTP server and is ready to receive HTTP requests and send back HTTP response.

In this case the server itself is telling us running on HTTP 127.0.0.1 which is the local host address. So when you find 127.0.0.1 it means it's the local IP address. If you use this IP address it means you are asking for a service inside your machine. 

So it will only work in your machine from a client in your machine. But then here you will also see the IP address in my current network. In this moment I am under a Durham and my IP address is 10.0.2.15. Actually this is the IP of the virtual machine inside my host. 

So if we send an HTTP request to this URI we are referring to this web server and in this case since 5000 is not the standard port we need to specify also the port when we do the request. So pay attention that the standard port for HTTP is 8.0. Anything different from 8.0.80 needs to be specified in the URL. So if we go back to Brave for example and we write the exact string HTTP it was 127.0.0.1 after the colon you write 5000 which is the port in which my server is running and then slash from now on we are identifying the resource inside my web server. 

Our web server is programmed for simulating a simple smart home in which for example there is a living room and there is a dining room and in each of these there is a door sensor and a temperature sensor. So in this case I know that you cannot see very well. Okay so in this case I just asked for a resource which is not existing and the server is replying as error not found. 

If we write living room slash temperature this is a resource which is already mapped in our server and if we press enter we are sending a GET request for that resource which is returning us a fake value of the temperature in the living room which is a simulated value in this case 27.21. What other things can we do? Of course we can play with the value inside this URI to refer to different resources. But now let's go back to the command line and let's play with this URL. So let's try other request methods.

So again remember that to play with the server you need the server to be running so whenever you start the server don't close the terminal otherwise you are closing the server. Here on the right side we have also our terminal for being a client. With the clear if you want to delete you write clear you delete the terminal history. 

What do we want to do is for example sending a POST request. How can we send a POST request? There is the minus capital X option to specify inside the URL terminal a different request method. For example specifying CURL minus X GET we are sending a GET request minus X POST we are sending a POST request and so on. 

For example minus X POST and then I specify the URL which is HTTP 127.0.0.1 which is again the local address to refer to a server in my machine. We need to specify the port so colon and the port 5000 and then from now on we have the resource and optionally we can set the parameters. The resource can be for example living room slash temperature. 

In this case if I click the server is telling me watch out this method is not allowed for this resource because the temperature cannot be changed by any HTTP client so you cannot send me a POST on this resource so you can only read this resource. So if we change back the method instead of POST the GET you receive the temperature and that's it. So it depends on the server and the list of allowed actions for a specific resource that you will have a specific response. 

But what's important here is that if there is something wrong the server will still reply and tell you what's wrong. For example 4.05 is an error code meaning a client side error. Any code with 4 as a first digit is a client side error meaning that in this case my method which is POST is not allowed. 

We can get the same kind of errors which is client side errors for example when we ask for a non-existing resource. For example in this case living room slash temp is something not existing and if I send this error not found is typically mapped with a 4.04. It was very very famous the 4.04 error when you were looking around in the web services and asking for random pages. The same can be done for other kind of resources and methods using different strings here for example DELETE and of course also in this case the resource was not found if you write back temperature the method is not allowed because you typically forbid the clients to delete a resource inside your server unless you are not authenticated or something like this. 

So if we also want to know more about what's happening in this simple request for example going back to carl minus x get http the local IP address 5000 living room temperature. If you add to this command the minus v option, small v, minus v stands for verbose. You have a more rich output stating what's happening behind this communication and in this case you find a lot of information which is part of the HTTP protocol. 

For example you find the method, the name of the resource, the protocol version in this case HTTP 1.1. So you find a lot of information that the client and the server need to exchange in this case only for exchanging four bytes which is the value of the temperature for example which is heavy for a IoT environment in which you only want to send the temperature you actually need to send the user agent the full name of the resource and so on. So we need a way to make this a bit tiny to fit the IoT. For this reason we have an adaptation of the HTTP protocol to the IoT environment which is co-op. 

So this is actually what we have done you find your resource in the server you send a get request and you receive the value of the temperature for example but still for sending the temperature you actually have a lot of information in this case a request response exchange was more than 370 bytes only for exchange for example four five bytes of information inside the temperature which is too much for the IoT and also if once we will also see the co-op server we will also be able to compare the impact in the system resources but actually the HTTP server is also a more energy and resource heaver it's more impacting in the server in which it is running. So for this reason since we have many drawbacks in the IoT as typically devices are battery operated they have very limited the CPU because still you need to fit a battery operated device so a cheap device so a lot of these devices are costing less than five euros sometimes less than one euro to have a full functional device which means very very limited resources you need to optimize energy and for optimized energy you need to optimize the communication because one byte extra is more energy to pay for transmitting it or for receiving it as well. So for this reason HTTP is not the best fit sometimes for simple applications you may have HTTP typically for not battery operated devices in the IoT world we find the co-op co-op is adaptation of HTTP which means it maintains the same structure with the same type of messages but it is optimized for lower latencies and for lower energy impacts.

So we will find many many different similarities between the two protocols because basically the was take the HTTP and remove everything which is like not needed for the communication but then we also have additional features that we don't find in HTTP which are designed for machine to machine communication because in web interactions you typically have a server and clients communicate with one server. In IoT it may be important to communicate many to many clients sending something many of them receiving something else. So in this case we will find differences and similarities. 

The first main difference is the transport layer protocol. So if HTTP needs to establish a connection before sending the data so I need the first to ask the server hey are you there let's connect the server will reply back okay I can connect and then I can ask my request and this is part of the TCP reliable transport layer. In a co-op we are using UDP which is basically take your data and send it I don't care if you are there or not I send my data if you receive okay if you don't I will check by myself I mean it's important for me if you receive then I ask again after some time otherwise that's it.

So the reliability is no more at the transport layer but it it's going up at the application layer so if you want reliability you need to take care of it you implement something to take care of the application reliability. Actually we will see that co-op already supports some sort of reliability with a similar to the quality of service which is by means of confirmable and confirmable and not confirmable messages and it is one of the features that we will see. You probably have seen already in the theory slides but still this is an important part since we don't have reliability at the transport layer we need to understand how to do it in the upper layer. 

So again going back to the co-op features first of all the paradigm is the same it's restful which means you have the resources you send a request and receive back a response so it's extremely similar to HTTP. We will also see that we have the same request method so get post put and delete are maintained in co-op and similar response codes are coming from the server for example if in HTTP we have 404 not found in co-op we will have something similar which is 4.04 so it's a matter of having a point and having maybe some additional codes if needed for the specific application. We have one new feature in co-op not present in HTTP which is the resource discovery and we will see later it's very important for discovering IoT applications and basically it lets the client find out what's in the server so it's a request a specific get request with which the client can ask hey tell me all the resources that you have so that I know what you can do.

Then another extra point for co-op is observe which is an option that we will see in a few minutes that allows you to get every new value of the resource without asking it explicitly. So you don't ask again and again the value of a resource but you ask only once and the server will start sending you the new values whenever the value change. So let's play with co-op let's start seeing some co-op requests and then we will see each of these features step by step so that we know what are we doing.

(Questo file è più lungo di 30 minuti. Aggiorna a Illimitato su https://turboscribe.ai/it/ per trascrivere file fino a 10 ore.)