(Trascritto da TurboScribe. Aggiorna a Illimitato per rimuovere questo messaggio.)

During the last lecture, we have seen our first approach to application layer protocols and we started with the co-op. We started investigating on HTTP and then we shifted our ideas on how an IoT application should work, bringing the methodology that we have in HTTP, so the request-response paradigm, adapting the requirements for the IoT, and then we introduced co-op. Last time we played with a local broker, with a local co-op server, and we have seen how to start a co-op server locally, downloading it from GitHub or using it from the virtual machine, but I didn't mention the fact that we can have a public server around with which we can play.

Actually, one of these is the co-op.me server, the one appearing in the slides, and you can play also with a public server, so we know how to interact with a server using a co-op client, we can ask with a resource discovery and so on, to also have an unexpected behavior from a public broker, with respect to our own public server that we know what it is responding to. Today we are shifting instead our topic to another application layer protocol, which is MQTT. We will see a recap from the theory for MQTT, so how the publisher-subscriber paradigm works, then we will see how to send MQTT messages.

It's no more a request-response, but it's a publish-subscribe, so we expect to have some methodology to send a publish, some methodology to send a subscribe, and so on. Finally, we will play with Wireshark, so the last part of the lecture, as we have done for HTTP and co-op, we will also investigate on MQTT packets in Wireshark. So, do you have any questions from the previous lecture, so for co-op or for the tools that we used last time? Okay, good.

In case you also have questions on what we are doing today, just raise your hand, or after the lecture you can still use the forum for sending us questions also, regardless of the challenge, and of course by email you can solve all your doubts. So, starting with a wrap of MQTT from the theory background, MQTT is a publish-subscribe protocol, which is very optimized for the IoT. We will see very soon what is a publish-subscribe protocol, so what is this paradigm, why it is different from a request-response, and we will get into the details of the different options that we can set in MQTT to play with the messages.

The good thing is that MQTT is designed for IoT networks, so for unreliable networks with low bandwidth, and maybe high latency, so we should find features that make MQTT good for these characteristics in the networks, and we will see that it is very well designed for these kinds of networks. Another advantage is that the implementations are typically very easy to use and very lightweight, so that you can fit in very small and cheap centers, so even with very little resources, you can play with MQTT and send a message. Moreover, it is data-agnostic, which means you can send basically anything, anything that can be translated into bytes can be transmitted with MQTT.

If you have an image, audio, or whatever, you can send it using MQTT, and the idea is very simple. You have a few types of messages for representing the main logic of the protocol, and that's it. So you will have one message for sending something, which is the publish, one message for receiving something, which is the subscribe, to start receiving the information, and we also have other messages for managing the network, or, for example, for clearing the interest in a topic which is unsubscribed.

So going into the architecture, in MQTT we have basically three different types of entities. The main central entity is the broker, which is responsible for interconnecting clients. The broker is a similar idea to a central server.

The idea is take the request from the client and dispatch to other clients. Then we have two types of clients, publishers and subscribers. Actually, the same client can act as both a publisher and a subscriber.

We identify them differently. For now, just understand what is the logic behind a publisher and behind a subscriber, but one client can do both the things together. What is a publisher? A publisher is someone who has data and wants to transmit to other clients.

So publishers publish messages. I have, for example, a temperature value, I send it to the broker. Subscribers, instead, is the one who wants to read the data.

So I want to receive the information and I send a subscribe request to the broker and from now on I will receive those information. So publisher sends, subscriber receives. How is this done? There is no communication publisher to subscriber directly, but everything is passing through the central broker.

We will never see a message from a client to a client, but everything is always passing through the central broker. So the idea is very easy. Instead of having a request-response paradigm in which you send a request to the server and the server replies with a value, in this case you subscribe for reading the value and from now on you will receive the new values coming from that resource.

In MQTT we call the resources as topics, which is a string. For example, we have seen a slash living room slash temperature. In this case, in MQTT, they are called topics and they have a tree structure, a hierarchical structure we will see in a while with some advancement with respect to HTTP or co-op.

So for example, let's say I have three publishers and three subscribers. In this case, we refer to topic one and topic two. We can put whatever type of string.

First of all, the subscribers need to subscribe. For example, subscriber Z is subscribing to topic one and from now on it will receive messages, so the values from all the publishers sending messages to that topic. So for example, publisher A is sending to topic one and these values then send to the subscriber Z and so on.

So for example, the idea is to have, let's say in a smart home in which you have a thermostat which should take actions on the values of a temperature. The temperature sensor is sending the data, the temperature value. The broker is taking the temperature and sending it to the thermostat, which is, for example, visualizing the value or maybe activating something else.

Where are the resources? So in co-op, we have seen that we have the URI, which allows us to identify the resources, so you specify the information on the server, the port, for example, so the domain name and the port, as well as the IP address. And then you start with listing the resource and the mental parameters. In this case, instead, you have brokers, so it's not more called the server, but it's broker and it can be anywhere in the Internet.

It can be in your local machine. So there are public brokers that we can play with together. There is a local broker in the virtual machine which allows us to play on the local machines or with the local addresses.

Of course, when we are playing with the local broker, we cannot interact together because it's in your machine or in my machine, but we will see that if we interact correctly with a public broker, we can interact together, I can send you a message, and vice versa. The point is, if you are under the poly-me network, the standard port for the MQTT protocols is 1883 for the raw version, 8883 for the secure version of MQTT. So these two ports are blocked by the firewall of poly-me network, so it will not work if you try to go to a public broker under these ports.

The reason for which, at the moment, I am using my hotspot, and so I will be able to connect and play with this broker. If you want to play with me as well, be sure that you are using a VPN or your hotspot and you are not under Duroam or poly-me. So here we have two different brokers that we suggest to use.

However, there is plenty of public brokers typically hosting private or public applications. And here on the slides you find also a list from GitHub pointing to some of these public brokers. So let's open the virtual machine, and what we are going to do is the following architecture.

We will have in the virtual machine a client acting as a subscriber, so trying to read the values, and a client acting as a publisher, so sending the value. And so we expect that the two clients connect to the broker, the subscriber sends a subscriber request for a topic that we will decide, and from that moment we will receive the messages on that topic. So we will try to understand if this is working by sending ourselves a message on that topic.

One of the main differences between co-op and MQTT is also the connection mechanism. While co-op is on UDP, so you directly send your message, MQTT is using TCP. So before doing everything, first of all you have the TCP handshake, but also at the application layer you have a connection mechanism.

You have an MQTT message sending connect, and then the server, the broker, in this case will reply back with a knock, confirming that you are connected, and then you can start with your messages. So we will always have a connect and a knock to start the communication between a client and a broker. Something which is not happening in co-op, and at the moment is introducing, you can call it overhead, I call it maybe security aspect, so like reliability aspect, because you are sure that what you send is received, because you send only after you are connected.

So let's open the virtual machine, and we are using a client implementation which is part of the Mosquito framework. Mosquito is offering a broker, and this is the broker that we are going to use during this lecture when we are running our private broker, our local broker, and it's also providing some easy command line based implementations for clients, and we will see that there are two commands, one for publishing and one for subscribing, using the command line. Of course MQTT is a protocol, so you can implement the communication in any programming language that you want, if you use the lower layers, so at the lower layers you have TCP, so you connect with TCP, and then you set the proper bytes to communicate using MQTT.

Of course, for example, in Python there is a library, in Java there is a library, so if you are programming with one of the most common programming languages, there are typically libraries already implementing MQTT communication. In this case we are using command line tools, so we are not going to program anything. It's similar to what we have done in co-op or HTTP, so we can go and open a terminal, and here the first thing that we want to do is to send a subscribe request.

So to act as a subscriber, we want to read the values. Mosquito is providing us a client for doing so, and the command is mosquito underscore sub. Of course, this command will contain everything for sending successfully a message and receiving back all the notifications on that topic, the reason for which it's not only sending a subscribe, but we are first of all sending a connect, then receiving back the connect, and then sending the subscribe.

So the full implementation is more complex than a single request, because you need to take care of the protocol guidelines. So mosquito sub, after this option minus H to specify the address of the broker, we are playing with a public broker, which is test.mosquito.org. Again, this is outside of poly network, so if you are under the firewall, you can try, but it will be blocked and you will not receive anything. So mosquito sub minus H, after minus H, H means for host, so the address of the broker.

Then optionally, we can also specify the port. It can be with minus P. You specify what is the port in which the server is listening. In this case, the standard broker port is 1883, and we know for sure that test.mosquito.org is listening on this port, which is, again, the standard port for MQTT protocol.

After this, what do we need to specify? So we are sending a subscribe request, but what do we want to read? What are we interested in? So we need to specify the resource. The resources in MQTT are identified by topics. So minus T, and we specify the topic that we want to subscribe to.

The topic is a string, and it typically follows a three-based hierarchy. So for example, slash IOT slash poly me slash 2026. Consider that this is a public broker that is accessible from anywhere in the planet, which means if I subscribe to a standard, a very easy topic, I am probably receiving messages I don't care from other people.

It's public. So I write something which identifies our lecture, so it's probably less likely that I will receive random messages. So after minus T, we specify the topic, again, IOT poly me 2026, and that's it.

We can click enter, and at the moment we don't see anything, but if everything was fine, we are starting receiving messages on this topic. So let's try to see effectively if we can receive messages. How to be sure that everything is working? We ourself send the message.

How to send a message? If for subscribing we have the mosquito sub, for publishing we have a similar. You see? I received a message. So one of you already read probably the slide or a documentation or ask the GPT, I don't know, on how to send published messages, and someone just sent me ciao, which is good because it means it is working.

I subscribed correctly to a public broker, and any of you sending the message to the same broker and topic is sending me messages. Good and bad thing is that I don't know who was sending the message, and I cannot know even if I inspect the packets because the communication is never client to client, but it's passing to the broker. So I will never know the IP address of the person sending me the value, so I cannot know even if I see the IP address because the message is sent from your machine to the broker, and then the broker will send it to me.

So in this case, if I investigate on the packets, I will see the IP address of the broker. Good because it's anonymized, bad because I don't know if you write bad words, who is going to send it. It happened a lot of times during the past lectures, past years, that I see a lot of messages here with meme or bad words or whatever.

So let's try to see how we can send messages. Mosquito pub is the command, so it is very similar to the subscriber message. In this case, we are going to send something, so what we will miss with respect to the previous command is the real data to transmit.

So mosquito pub, again, minus H to specify the broker address. Actually, the minus H is the first option even if you don't specify minus H, so mosquito pub test.mosquito.org is the same as writing mosquito pub minus H and the name. Pay attention that if you mix and write other options before, then remember it's always a good practice to specify the option name with minus H. Then the same topic, so host topic.

The topic should be also the same, so iot.polimi.2026. Of course, if I want to receive, I need to send to the same broker, same topic, and then I am sending something, so I need to specify the value. For example, if I want to send a message, a string, I would say hello, or if I am mapping the logic of a temperature sensor, I can send a fake temperature value, and so on. In this implementation, the content of the message, which is going in the payload, is specified with minus M, which stands for message.

In this case, we can say, hello, I am here. Okay, perfect. It took a while, but eventually it was successful.

I sent the message, everything was fine. Still, if you see it stopping for a while, you don't know what is happening. So bad part of this implementation up to now is that we click enter, we wait, but we don't know what's actually happening.

So there is actually a good option that I suggest to always use to understand better what's happening, which is the minus D. Minus D stands for debug. You can see also what's happening behind the simple message, which is going to print the real messages that are going in output. Okay, let me clear.

So what is happening with the minus D, you start seeing the messages that are actually sent. In this case, we generate a client, we send the connect, and before receiving the connect, actually it took a while. So it was still waiting for the connect before being able to send the publish.

This is probably because my hotspot maybe is slow. And so this is why interacting with the public or also the broker is slow, I don't know. But this is why if you click enter and you wait for a while, but now we know that the delay is from when we send the connect to when we receive the connect.

So this is what's really happening behind the communication. You send a connect, you receive the connect, and after that, you can send the real message. In this case, the real message is a publish.

So client Moschitto sending publish, and here we have some options. We will see what are these options later. And then that's it.

We send a disconnect and we go away. This is the life cycle of the Moschitto pub command. So in the meantime, all the messages to this topic from my subscriber were received by the broker because you are continuing interacting.

For example, in this case, complimentary link. So if I stop the command and run everything with a minus D, also here I can see what's happening in the interaction for the subscription aspects. So let's see with the same command as before, so Moschitto sub test.moschitto.org, the topic, and then we press with the option minus D. So it's a bit slow.

We should see what's going on soon. Okay, so we are sending a connect. Then we receive the connect.

So we see what's going on. Then after the connect, I can send my interest in other sources, so I can subscribe. And in the subscribe, you need to specify what you are interested in.

For example, the topic, IoT Polimi26. After the subscribe, I will receive a confirmation that I successfully subscribed. So the interactions are typically sent and confirmed with an arc.

So connect, connect, subscribe, subscribe arc. And then from now on, I will receive notifications. So the real published message is coming from other clients to the broker.

And so we see client received the publish, and here we have the value and the number of bytes. Client received publish, five bytes alone, and so on. So by using the command, we are with control C, you can interrupt the flow of the client.

In this case, I stop the subscriber and as a good implementation, before going away, I disconnect from the broker. So if you see control C, and then automatically the client is sending a disconnect to the broker so that the broker knows we left. This is a difference with respect to the implementation that we are seeing in co-op CLI, which if you go away, there is no connection, I simply leave.

And the server was there sending me the messages for an observer, if you remember. In this case, this is not happening because this implementation is probably more properly done. And before going away, we disconnect so that the broker knows we just left.

And so all these messages to this topic, IoT Polimi 2026, are not forwarded to us because we are no more there. And this is also because MTTT is connection oriented, so of course, you cannot send something to a TCP if you are not connected to TCP. So again, these are the two commands, one for Mosquitos Hub.

You can use Mosquitos Hub and then write Mosquitos Hub and write minus minus help to read all the possible options that you can include in the command. And it's a bit long, so we will see some of these options specifying what to do with the MTTT packet that you are sending. However, you can read also the documentation in mosquito.org. There is the details of the implementation.

The same holds for the publisher. So Mosquitos Hub minus minus help. If you don't remember what is the structure, you go there and read how to use the message, for example.

In this case, we use the minus H to specify the host. The minus P can be and is optional for specifying the port. Again, it is optional if the port is the standard 1883.

Otherwise, you need to specify. Then we have minus T, minus Q. We have seen minus T, which is the topic. So what resource do you want to read or what resource do you want to change the value? So what is the topic? And then minus Q. Minus Q we didn't see.

We will see very soon. It's the quality of service. And we find the same in the publisher.

Here we also have additional options for specifying how to handle the published message. We will see that we have the retain option. We will see that we have the quality of service option similarly to the subscriber and so on.

What is a topic? A topic is a string that the broker uses to filter the messages. So I want to receive the values of a resource. I need to specify what kind of resource I want.

And I specify it using topics. So topics are using a hierarchical structure. And we will see that this hierarchy is important because MQTT allows us to subscribe to a full branch in the hierarchy.

And we will see how. Instead of directly sending, for example, building 5, floor 0, room 503, temperature, which is a full string, I can decide to receive all the messages under building 5. So let's say I have five floors under building 5. You can receive messages on all the layers under building 5, for example. So this is important to remember that there is a hierarchical structure on topics, which in this case becomes very important because we can leverage these to receive multiple topics at once.

How is it done? It's done using wildcards.

(Questo file è più lungo di 30 minuti. Aggiorna a Illimitato su https://turboscribe.ai/it/ per trascrivere file fino a 10 ore.)